Given a linked list, return the node where the cycle begins. If there is no cycle, return null.

My answer

```ruby
# Definition for singly-linked list.
# class ListNode(object):
#     def __init__(self, x):
#         self.val = x
#         self.next = None

class Solution(object):
    def detectCycle(self, head):
        """
        :type head: ListNode
        :rtype: ListNode
        """
        nodeseen = set([])
        while head != None:
            if head in nodeseen:
                return head
            else:
                nodeseen.add(head)
            head = head.next
        return None
```

Complexity Analysis

Time complexity : O(n)

For both cyclic and acyclic inputs, the algorithm must visit each node exactly once. This is transparently obvious for acyclic lists because the nnth node points to null, causing the loop to terminate. For cyclic lists, the if condition will cause the function to return after visiting the nnth node, as it points to some node that is already in visited. In both cases, the number of nodes visited is exactly nn, so the runtime is linear in the number of nodes.

Space complexity : O(n)

For both cyclic and acyclic inputs, we will need to insert each node into the Set once. The only difference between the two cases is whether we discover that the "last" node points to null or a previously-visited node. Therefore, because the Set will contain nn distinct nodes, the memory footprint is linear in the number of nodes.

Solution from Educative.io

Solution #
If we know the length of the LinkedList cycle, we can find the start of the cycle through the following steps:

Take two pointers. Let’s call them pointer1 and pointer2.

Initialize both pointers to point to the start of the LinkedList.

We can find the length of the LinkedList cycle using the approach discussed in LinkedList Cycle. Let’s assume that the length of the cycle is ‘K’ nodes.

Move pointer2 ahead by ‘K’ nodes.

Now, keep incrementing pointer1 and pointer2 until they both meet.

As pointer2 is ‘K’ nodes ahead of pointer1, which means, pointer2 must have completed one loop in the cycle when both pointers meet. Their meeting point will be the start of the cycle.

```ruby
from __future__ import print_function


class Node:
  def __init__(self, value, next=None):
    self.value = value
    self.next = next

  def print_list(self):
    temp = self
    while temp is not None:
      print(temp.value, end='')
      temp = temp.next
    print()


def find_cycle_start(head):
  cycle_length = 0
  # find the LinkedList cycle
  slow, fast = head, head
  while (fast is not None and fast.next is not None):
    fast = fast.next.next
    slow = slow.next
    if slow == fast:  # found the cycle
      cycle_length = calculate_cycle_length(slow)
      break
  return find_start(head, cycle_length)


def calculate_cycle_length(slow):
  current = slow
  cycle_length = 0
  while True:
    current = current.next
    cycle_length += 1
    if current == slow:
      break
  return cycle_length


def find_start(head, cycle_length):
  pointer1 = head
  pointer2 = head
  # move pointer2 ahead 'cycle_length' nodes
  while cycle_length > 0:
    pointer2 = pointer2.next
    cycle_length -= 1
  # increment both pointers until they meet at the start of the cycle
  while pointer1 != pointer2:
    pointer1 = pointer1.next
    pointer2 = pointer2.next
  return pointer1


def main():
  head = Node(1)
  head.next = Node(2)
  head.next.next = Node(3)
  head.next.next.next = Node(4)
  head.next.next.next.next = Node(5)
  head.next.next.next.next.next = Node(6)

  head.next.next.next.next.next.next = head.next.next
  print("LinkedList cycle start: " + str(find_cycle_start(head).value))

  head.next.next.next.next.next.next = head.next.next.next
  print("LinkedList cycle start: " + str(find_cycle_start(head).value))

  head.next.next.next.next.next.next = head
  print("LinkedList cycle start: " + str(find_cycle_start(head).value))


main()
```

Time Complexity #
As we know, finding the cycle in a LinkedList with ‘N’ nodes and also finding the length of the cycle requires O(N). Also, as we saw in the above algorithm, we will need O(N) to find the start of the cycle. Therefore, the overall time complexity of our algorithm will be O(N).

Space Complexity #
The algorithm runs in constant space O(1).


Solution from Leetcode

Approach 2: Floyd's Tortoise and Hare

Intuition

What happens when a fast runner (a hare) races a slow runner (a tortoise) on a circular track? At some point, the fast runner will catch up to the slow runner from behind.

Algorithm

Floyd's algorithm is separated into two distinct phases. In the first phase, it determines whether a cycle is present in the list. If no cycle is present, it returns null immediately, as it is impossible to find the entrance to a nonexistant cycle. Otherwise, it uses the located "intersection node" to find the entrance to the cycle.

Phase 1

Here, we initialize two pointers - the fast hare and the slow tortoise. Then, until hare can no longer advance, we increment tortoise once and hare twice. If, after advancing them, hare and tortoise point to the same node, we return it. Otherwise, we continue. If the while loop terminates without returning a node, then the list is acyclic, and we return null to indicate as much.

Here, the nodes in the cycle have been labelled from 0 to C-1, where C is the length of the cycle. The noncyclic nodes have been labelled from -F to -1, where F is the number of nodes outside of the cycle. After F iterations, tortoise points to node 0 and hare points to some node h, where F≡h(modC). This is because hare traverses 2F nodes over the course of F iterations, exactly F of which are in the cycle. After C-h more iterations, tortoise obviously points to node C−h, but (less obviously) hare also points to the same node. To see why, remember that hare traverses 2(C−h) from its starting position of h:

h+2(C−h)=2C−h≡C−h(modC)

Therefore, given that the list is cyclic, hare and tortoise will eventually both point to the same node, known henceforce as the intersection.

Phase 2

Given that phase 1 finds an intersection, phase 2 proceeds to find the node that is the entrance to the cycle. To do so, we initialize two more pointers: ptr1, which points to the head of the list, and ptr2, which points to the intersection. Then, we advance each of them by 1 until they meet; the node where they meet is the entrance to the cycle, so we return it.

Use the diagram below to help understand the proof of this approach's correctness.

We can harness the fact that hare moves twice as quickly as tortoise to assert that when hare and tortoise meet at node hh, hare has traversed twice as many nodes. Using this fact, we deduce the following:

2⋅distance(tortoise)=distance(hare)
2(F+a)=F+a+b+a
2F+2a=F+2a+b
F=b

Because F=b, pointers starting at nodes h and 0 will traverse the same number of nodes before meeting.

```ruby
class Solution(object):
    def getIntersect(self, head):
        tortoise = head
        hare = head

        # A fast pointer will either loop around a cycle and meet the slow
        # pointer or reach the `null` at the end of a non-cyclic list.
        while hare is not None and hare.next is not None:
            tortoise = tortoise.next
            hare = hare.next.next
            if tortoise == hare:
                return tortoise

        return None

    def detectCycle(self, head):
        if head is None:
            return None

        # If there is a cycle, the fast/slow pointers will intersect at some
        # node. Otherwise, there is no cycle, so we cannot find an entrance to
        # a cycle.
        intersect = self.getIntersect(head)
        if intersect is None:
            return None

        # To find the entrance to the cycle, we have two pointers traverse at
        # the same speed -- one from the front of the list, and the other from
        # the point of intersection.
        ptr1 = head
        ptr2 = intersect
        while ptr1 != ptr2:
            ptr1 = ptr1.next
            ptr2 = ptr2.next

        return ptr1
```

Complexity Analysis

Time complexity : O(n)

For cyclic lists, hare and tortoise will point to the same node after F+C-h iterations, as demonstrated in the proof of correctness. F+C−h ≤ F+C = n, so phase 1 runs in O(n) time. Phase 2 runs for F < n iterations, so it also runs in O(n) time.

For acyclic lists, hare will reach the end of the list in roughly n/2 iterations, causing the function to return before phase 2. Therefore, regardless of which category of list the algorithm receives, it runs in time linearly proportional to the number of nodes.

Space complexity : O(1)

Floyd's Tortoise and Hare algorithm allocates only pointers, so it runs with constant overall memory usage.
