Your are given an array of positive integers nums.

Count and print the number of (contiguous) subarrays where the product of all the elements in the subarray is less than k.

Solution from Leetcode:

1. Binary Search on Logarithms

Intuition

We can reduce the problem to subarray sums instead of subarray products using log. The motivation for this is that the product of some arbitrary subarray may be way too large (potentially 1000^50000), and also dealing with sums gives us some more familiarity as it becomes similar to other problems we may have solved before.

Algorithm

After this transformation where every value x becomes log(x), let us take prefix sums prefix[i+1] = nums[0] + nums[1] + ... + nums[i]. Now we are left with the problem of finding, for each i, the largest j so that nums[i] + ... + nums[j] = prefix[j] - prefix[i] < k.

Because prefix is a monotone increasing array, this can be solved with binary search. We add the width of the interval [i, j] to our answer, which counts all subarrays [i, k] with k <= j.

```ruby
class Solution(object):
    def numSubarrayProductLessThanK(self, nums, k):
        if k == 0: return 0
        k = math.log(k)

        prefix = [0]
        for x in nums:
            prefix.append(prefix[-1] + math.log(x))

        ans = 0
        for i, x in enumerate(prefix):
            j = bisect.bisect(prefix, x + k - 1e-9, i+1)
            ans += j - i - 1
        return ans
 ```
 
 Complexity Analysis

Time Complexity: O(NlogN), where N is the length of nums. Inside our for loop, each binary search operation takes O(logN) time.

Space Complexity: O(N), the space used by prefix.
 
 2. Sliding Window
 
 Intuition

For each right, call opt(right) the smallest left so that the product of the subarray nums[left] * nums[left + 1] * ... * nums[right] is less than k. opt is a monotone increasing function, so we can use a sliding window.

Algorithm

Our loop invariant is that left is the smallest value so that the product in the window prod = nums[left] * nums[left + 1] * ... * nums[right] is less than k.

For every right, we update left and prod to maintain this invariant. Then, the number of intervals with subarray product less than k and with right-most coordinate right, is right - left + 1. We'll count all of these for each value of right.

```ruby
class Solution(object):
    def numSubarrayProductLessThanK(self, nums, k):
        if k <= 1: return 0
        prod = 1
        ans = left = 0
        for right, val in enumerate(nums):
            prod *= val
            while prod >= k:
                prod /= nums[left]
                left += 1
            ans += right - left + 1
        return ans
 ```
 
Complexity Analysis

Time Complexity: O(N), where N is the length of nums. left can only be incremented at most N times.

Space Complexity: O(1), the space used by prod, left, and ans.

If the return is the collection of subarray

```ruby
from collections import deque


def find_subarrays(arr, target):
  result = []
  product = 1
  left = 0
  for right in range(len(arr)):
    product *= arr[right]
    while (product >= target and left < len(arr)):
      product /= arr[left]
      left += 1
    # since the product of all numbers from left to right is less than the target therefore,
    # all subarrays from lef to right will have a product less than the target too; to avoid
    # duplicates, we will start with a subarray containing only arr[right] and then extend it
    temp_list = deque()
    for i in range(right, left-1, -1):
      temp_list.appendleft(arr[i])
      result.append(list(temp_list))
  return result


def main():
  print(find_subarrays([2, 5, 3, 10], 30))
  print(find_subarrays([8, 2, 6, 5], 50))


main()
```

Time complexity #
The main for-loop managing the sliding window takes O(N) but creating subarrays can take up to O(N^2) in the worst case. Therefore overall, our algorithm will take O(N^3).

Space complexity #
Ignoring the space required for the output list, the algorithm runs in O(N) space which is used for the temp list.
